Q. Explain why deletion is typically faster in a linked list compared to an array in Java.

Ans: Both Arrays and Linked Lists are linear data structures that store data in memory. However, the deletion of data is faster in linked list in comparison to the arrays. This is because of the way data is structure and accessed in thier data structures. 
An array is a data structure that stores similar data type in a continous block of memory which is allocated by JVM(Java Vitual Memeory). Arrays are index-based data structures where each data element is associated with an index .  The first element of an array has an index 0, second element has has index 1 and so on. Since the memory is continous, deletion of any element in an array requires shifting of every element that follows it one index upward to fill the gap. This operation has time complexity O(n). It is very time consuming for large arary. For example, the  array test has data a, b, c, d at index 0, 1, 2, 3 respectively. Deletion of data b at index 1 will require shifting of array. The c which is currently at index 2 will be shifted to index 1. Similarly, d at index 3 will be shifted to 2. 


A linked list is a list made up of nodes where each node contains a data field and a reference or pointer to the next node. Pointer stores an address and it helps to connect one node to an address of another node. Because of this, the deletion process is very simple in linked lists. To delete a data, one can simply chanage the the pointer of the prevoius node and point it to the next one while skipping the node to be deleted. The operation has the time complexity O(1).  Let us suppose  a linked list has four nodes and third node is to be deleted. Then we can have the pointer for the 2nd item, which points at the current 3rd node. After that update the pointer in the 2nd item to point at the 4th item while skipping the 3rd item.    
